The Way The Village Works
Matthew Ryan Dalrymple


I never thought I’d look back and question the way my elder led.  Though I'm questioning everything now, after holding the necklace they once wore daily.  It was mixed in with a few of their other mementos they kept in the simple box next to their bed; the ones that have now passed to me.  There was this hope I had, that in this box, I’d find something to give me all the answers, to guide me in leading our people.  I’ve been caressing the claws, bringing me a mix of grief and fond memories.  The tingling sensation the goosebumps brought on, while fun, brought me out of it.  Eventually placing the claws between my fingers, as if one of my hands was the bear’s they belonged to, a feeling of shock hit me. A small gasp escaped my mouth, while my heart began pumping fast, and my mind started racing back.  Stop.  Slow your breath.  Patience, as with most things, I must approach this with clarity and reason.


The last day it was worn was the day I got my second name.  It was supposed to be a day like any other, to not make your naming a huge deal, it's just supposed to happen, a natural transition.  I first heard the rattling of those claws as Elder Bear put them, the last thing he did before leaning down, giving me a gentle tap then a light squeeze on my foot.  Just enough to give a gentle signal for my body to start waking up.  Sleep was an amazing experience.  My mind would play these tales I’d get to experience; I was carefree, so I would let my mind take over, and worry less about the body it was in and focus more on the adventure I’d be going on.  I didn’t want to be taken away from that, so I’d try to sleep as long as I could.  Although I loved those trips, I always enjoyed being pulled from it all to the rattling.  To the tap. The light squeeze.  It meant I got to get up and spend the day with my father.


We can’t do everything, all the time.  That’s the type of wisdom he would impart on me.  We don’t get to both experience the dream and have the joy of talking about it with someone at the same time.  We have to come back home, get up, go out, take care of business, have fun doing it, then enjoy the group.  Then as we all got tired and the light dims, we’d all travel back to our homes for the next journey.  We pop back into this world to live in our body, to experience, then we fall back into the space where the physical can rest and the imagination can take over.  We had to keep a balance.  We keep our mind and our body sharp; all while trying to make the best of it.  It’s a hard task sometimes, that is, making the best of it.  I’m the one up first now; I don’t know how he did it, the village on his shoulders and all.  I don’t get to rest like I used to, my mind has to be going, it’s gotta be making sure I don’t mess up and ruin what he had going for us.  I’m scared the decisions I make might ruin this experience called life.  I want all of us to have the opportunity to enjoy it all.


When we’d get up, he’d leave first, I think it was so I’d get a first bit of me-time.  Where I can have the privacy to reflect on my dream or whatever my mind wanted to do, anything to just let my mind warm up. When I was ready, I’d push open the flap, and let the burst of fresh air hit me.  My arms and legs stretching out as far as I can while still standing.  That’s when he’d come in for the strike.  He’d lean down, swoop me up, and start carrying me over to the breakfast basket.  He’d hold me up to it, and I’d grab some fruit and bread.  I know I wasn't supposed to think back on that day, to think of it as any other, but I can't help it.  I remember the ripe peaches I grabbed, and the bread was so fresh, it tore off so easily.  Everything must have been stocked the night before, which was shocking because we had just had a party the night before; someone stayed up to prepare for today.


Elder Kindling was next up behind us and began to exchange pleasantries.  As we turned around to greet them, I saw others were emerging from their homes, most doing the morning stretch to the sky.  Normally we see Swift behind us and exchange quick pleasantries, but they were nowhere in sight.  Could have been up first and starting their day already.  Maybe they made sure to make today's breakfast fresh as can be.  But I quickly thought less about it, as I was lowered down, I heard Elder Kindling mentioning in a quieter tone some missing or small portioning of venison tonight for everyone.  I started throwing food into my mouth, so I only heard parts through my devouring, but the apology sounded puzzled; they were sure there was enough yesterday, but going forward they will double check, triple check.  Father chuckled and reassured Elder Kindling that it wasn’t a big deal.  We can double up on beans tonight and not worry about serving him any meat at all.  We have light duties tomorrow and can spare the energy.  But now was time for us to collect wood.  They both looked down at me, recognizing my presence (or maybe I had slurped too loud) and smiled.  As I looked back up, peach-bite full in my mouth, I gave a nod and the best smile I could give without showing my chewed breakfast.  They chuckled as Elder Kindling reached up for breakfast and dad tapped me on the shoulder, ushering me towards the wood path.


After the food was finished, we started skipping through the tree growth.  After the wilds, you eventually start to notice where the new growth blends away from a scattered pattern into the lines of the tree farm.  This was father’s idea he had as a kid, well one of many; it’s what eventually got him his second name, Sun.  People just looked up to him, they gravitated to his warmth, and looked to him for answers, which he always seemed to have.  When they were concerned about the longer trips to collect wood, and noticed it would only get longer, father spoke up and the Elders listened.  We needed a balance, so we started planting new trees where we’d taken the old, eventually we would get to harvest them, so the wild lands could be kept wild.  He saw how many trees we went through, and started planting that many, plus a few more in case our village grows, or if we happened to party a bit extra.  Eventually we will get to harvest the ones we started, but we didn’t know how long it would take them to grow.  Well we didn’t know then, but I know now that we will probably start to harvest some during my lifetime.


No planting was required today, no cutting down a tree, just grabbing from the dry pile and chopping them smaller.  We do our gesture of thanks; a moment of sincerity, saying out loud that we thank these trees for providing us the ability to cook our food and share the nights longer with our friends and family.  On the nights the moon is out more, we give a little thanks to it on behalf of the trees, for we don't have to take as much from the trees those mornings.  We shift straight into work mode, setting up logs and slicing through them with our axes.  Lifting the logs, swinging the axe, it’s all work we must do.  Father makes sure that we frame our minds to the duality of our task. Yes we are using our bodies to collect wood, but this also gives us the chance to get stronger, to work out muscles and heart.  With the blanket loaded, we drag the wood back to camp, giving us a restful walk while we appreciate the way our body and minds feel, a feeling of joy, a happiness through strength.


After dropping off the wood, we rushed to the path that leads to the river.  I was in front, going as fast as I could; I kept track of how the trails curved and where each rock and root lie.  It pushed my mind to anticipate, and think far ahead, but it allowed me to go faster and not trip up.  When I hit that last curve that shoots me straight into the river, I don’t stop.  I push myself to the fastest I can, knowing I can’t make it to the other edge of the river, but I still let my body fling me towards the center, as far as I can.  Sometimes I’ll curl up as tight as I can as I fly off the edge.  When I hit the water it apparently makes a funny sound the faster I go, but it’s also fun to see how far into the water I can make it before it pushes back.  After the water stops me, I start heading back towards the surface.


When I emerged, I looked for the shore, and saw my father just started to walk in, smiling and giving me signals of success.  Sounded great!  I swam back to the shore, where I could stand up, scrub, and clean myself.  My father did the same.  A nice clean body after all the work is a nice transition.  Our skin can feel good and we can focus on the entertainment.  As I was finishing rinsing myself, I remember looking up the river and seeing Swift far upstream.  Looked like they were carrying rocks from the river into the forest; big rocks too.  I was going to ask about that, and tell them all about my big splash that morning, as they would have loved to have been there.  Swift was faster than I think I’ll ever be, but I’m probably the only other person who comes close.


We walked back towards home, us and our clothes drying fast.  It was only a little after arriving back that it was time to get into position for stretches.  Not everyone’s morning work was heart-pumping, but we all came together to stretch.  Someone would choose to guide us, getting our bodies stretched and feeling great.  We’d all gather in the center of the village, the ground was flat, dry, and just hard enough.  The fire was in the direct center, so it would take up its own spot, others would accommodate around it.  We’d all face the same way, and follow along.  But I liked the spot behind the fire, as I loved seeing it move around, as if stretching along with us.


I think that was your best splash yet, River.  That was it, we had just finished a stretch, and I had my second name.  Those were the words that gave it.  There was no ceremony, no big speech, just normal sentences, something they would say to me any other day.  Throughout the day, and beyond, everyone just started addressing me as River when they spoke to me, as if it had always been my name.  They didn’t even put an emphasis on the name when they spoke it.  I was expecting they would, as if to let me know that it was their first time calling me River, or that they were congratulating me on the new name.  However, they just treated me how they normally would, but now calling me by something they think fits.  A name they want to call me after getting to know me as a conscious being.  I know that if I didn’t like it, I could state I like my first name more, or even come up with my own name, and they’d use it.  But it’s fun to see how others see you, to see the impact you make on them.  And to them, I was their river.  What brought them to the name, why they all see that in me, that is something you learn over time.


I was ecstatic to have this gift of a name.  After stretches, I skipped on over to Elder Kindling, with as high knees as I could, so I looked like a gazelle in the fields.  They stared at me, as I came towards them, with a giant smile on their face.  I did a final jump where I landed in front of them with my arms and legs outstretched.  Elder Kindling swooped me up, just like my father would, but started spinning me around.  We couldn’t help but laugh.  They lowered me down and wished me a good morning, addressing me as River.  I grinned to show my appreciation of the name, but they just let me know we have a busy day ahead, and I should go join the other kids playing or go pick some berries in the patches.


The rest of the day was full of fun, but it was the talk with father about his third name that stuck with me the most.  Towards the end of the night, the final show around the fire went on.  There had been dances, songs, and anything people wanted to show that they had been practicing, but the final show was The Dance with the Bear.  Here and there a group, mostly the older kids, would put on a show about how they thought the battle my father fought went down.  Every time one came on, I could see my father’s face irk, but he would lightly cheer them on, as he knew it gave them joy to perform.  Elder Kindling knew his discomfort with them and would poke him hard with it.  They’d get his attention, a nudge on the shoulder, a point to the stage, and always make some sort of jestering line about it.  “This the one about you is it?”, “What was the size of it? I heard the bear was as large as a mountain last time.”, “Didn’t you fight it with only one finger?”.  They always were in a tone that addressed they knew he didn’t like the stories, and knew he only went along with them to appease the people.  He’d laugh back, appreciating the gesture.


Swift chimed in with a shout before it started.  Something about how it was supposed to be them that day, walking the perimeter, and how they’d have been able to handle two bears at once.  Many jesterred back, and with a grunt the crowd quieted and the show began.  It was during the show that my father told me about that day in more detail and about the claws he wears as a reminder.  He wished it would have been Swift, he didn’t want to have had to kill that bear, but it was him and not Swift.  He couldn’t see another way out of it, he had to kill the bear to survive.  He carries the claws around his neck as a reminder of what that day taught him, and his thanks to the bear for teaching him.


This first claw here is luck, you don’t get to choose how you start in this life, and you have to deal with that, but sometimes you just have to have some luck to survive.  The second claw I wear is for defense, you have to do what you can to stay in shape, both body and mind, to try your best to defend yourself and others.  The third claw is about reasoning, sometimes it’s two beings colliding without reason, but to try and use your mind to understand the situation and what you can do can help wonders.  The fourth claw is patience, to give your mind time to understand, to give your opponent an opportunity to make a mistake.  The final claw here is about knowing when to strike, I couldn’t be patient anymore, my body was getting tired, if I didn’t strike, eventually that bear would have got me.  I don’t ever want to have to be in that position again, but if I do, I hope these claws will give me the guidance to keep on living and keep our village alive.


When the child-bear had finally been defeated, the crowd roared with cheers of delight.  People stood up, socialized, and started going in bunches back to their homes.  I spent that time looking around for Swift, so I could tell them my tales of the day, but they were nowhere in sight.  They must have disappeared during the show or right after.  I thought I’d get the chance the next day to tell them, and to hear what they’d been up to that day, and why I didn’t get a chance to hear them speak my second name.  But I couldn’t stay up any longer.  I hugged father, Elder Kindling, and drifted to my bed, heavily blinking my eyes on the way.


No rattling of the claws, no tap or squeeze.  The light started coming through the edges around the door, the bird song loud in my ears.  Rubbing my eyes, I got up out of bed, noticing my father was missing.  He didn’t wake me up.  He even left his necklace laying near his bed, so as to not wake me with its rattling.  I walked out of our home, stretching as usual, but my mind was curious as to why today was different so far.  I was expecting to be pulled back from my dreams by my father, not mother nature.  I wasn’t expecting Elder Kindling to come to me so quickly as I came out of home.  I wasn't expecting them to let me know that Swift had been killed by a bear last night.
They thought he had been trying to lure a bear with some chunks of meat into a trap he’d set with those rocks.  It did seem to lure the bear, but after that it didn’t go as Swift had planned. Their mangled body had been found, with a broken claw still wedged in it.  That was the day my father said he no longer wished to be called by his third name, that he would no longer wear the necklace.  He didn’t want to be reminded of a name that brought sadness to a friend.  A name that a friend would go out of their way to try to earn, and only end up dead.  We all made sure to respect his wishes, and it hadn't been until today that I even thought of him as anything other than my father, Elder Sun.


“Hey, Elder River, I know you deserve some time alone, but there is something we need your help with” a voice speaks from the door.
Duty calls.
“No worries, I’ll be right there.”
Before I left the home, I placed the four-clawed necklace back in the box.
